---
layout: post
title: Google vs Twitter vs Facebook
tags:
- Privacy
categories:
- Web
---
<p>Building upon my previous post on <a href="http://fellgernon.tumblr.com/post/16639421588/the-false-ideals-of-the-web#.TyjN0ePOzIw">The False Ideals of the Web</a>, I&#8217;ve picked up a few links related to the continuous struggle between Google, Twitter and Facebook. Plus, they all have to deal with privacy issues and compiling with government policies.</p>
<p><a href="http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/technology-16511794">Twitter unhappy about Google&#8217;s social search changes</a> reflects the power struggle between Google and Twitter. But it&#8217;s still mostly about Google vs Facebook than Google vs Twitter as Google&#8217;s main competitor is Facebook, Twitter just gets affected on the side. At least that&#8217;s my impression. </p>
<p>Now, do you like to see your +1 affect the google results? Well, yes and no. I do like the idea of my friend&#8217;s +1 affecting the results because I&#8217;m likely looking for a link they told me about or I have similar interests to them. I&#8217;m not sure I like the idea of my own +1 clicks affecting the search results. It feels like searching your bookmarks and the web, and in most cases I&#8217;m looking for something I don&#8217;t have in my bookmarks, so why show them to me? Fortunately, if this is posing a problem you can still use browser &#8220;hidden identity&#8221; modes like Google Chrome&#8217;s Incognito Window. For example, I was looking for more information on &#8220;graduate student life impostor syndrome&#8221; and the results changed quite a bit whether I was using the normal or the incognito window. Using the incognito one lead me to find some interesting sites with the information I was looking for. In short, I like having the option to choose whether I want to use the +1 data or not to modify the search results. It&#8217;s useful in some cases, not so much in others.</p>
<p><a href="http://www.nytimes.com/2012/02/01/technology/riding-personal-data-facebook-is-going-public.html?pagewanted=1&amp;_r=1&amp;partner=rss&amp;emc=rss">Personal Data’s Value? Facebook Is Set to Find Out</a> presents a different picture as it&#8217;s mostly on the money side of things related to Facebook. It&#8217;s also pretty blunt in saying that Google is an old player and that Facebook is the new web. Ok, that&#8217;s true in a sense but it&#8217;s not like people have stopped using Google. It also not too attractive from the privacy point of view. After all, Facebook has had way more problems with Privacy than Google and I don&#8217;t like how Facebook has been quite secretive on the topic for a long time. Without Google+ and it&#8217;s circles, Facebook wouldn&#8217;t have made it easier for the users to manage their friend groups. I don&#8217;t like the layout of Facebook and I find the adds to be way more intrusive than in Google, so all in all, I&#8217;m not a Facebook fan though it has it uses.  I also doubt whether Facebook is worth that much money. It feels like it&#8217;s a paper castle that will fall apart once people get to know more details from the company. But hey, if you want to invest your money on it and buy more shares, go ahead!</p>
